Meet Professor Brian Little, former Harvard University psychology
lecturer and winner of the 3M Teaching Fellowship, sometimes referred to as the Nobel Prize of university teaching. Short, sturdy, bespectacled, andendearing, Professor Little has a booming baritone, a habit of breaking
into song and twirling about onstage, and an old-school actor’s way of
emphasizing consonants and elongating vowels. He’s been described as a
cross between Robin Williams and Albert Einstein, and when he makes a
joke that pleases his audience, which happens a lot, he looks even more
delighted than they do. His classes at Harvard were always oversubscribed
and often ended with standing ovations.
In contrast, the man I’m about to describe seems a very di􀊃erent breed:
he lives with his wife in a tucked-away house on more than two acres of
remote Canadian woods, visited occasionally by his children and
grandchildren, but otherwise keeping to himself. He spends his free time
scoring music, reading and writing books and articles, and e-mailing
friends long notes he calls “e-pistles.” When he does socialize, he favors
one-on-one encounters. At parties, he pairs o􀊃 into quiet conversations as
soon as he can or excuses himself “for a breath of fresh air.” When he’s
forced to spend too much time out and about or in any situation involving
conflict, he can literally become ill.
Would you be surprised if I told you that the vaudevillean professor and
the recluse who prefers a life of the mind are one and the same man?
Maybe not, when you consider that we all behave di􀊃erently depending
on the situation. But if we’re capable of such 􀉻exibility, does it even make
sense to chart the di􀊃erences between introverts and extroverts? Is the
very notion of introversion-extroversion too pat a dichotomy: the
introvert as sage philosopher, the extrovert as fearless leader? The
introvert as poet or science nerd, the extrovert as jock or cheerleader?
Aren’t we all a little of both?
Psychologists call this the “person-situation” debate: Do 􀉹xed
personality traits really exist, or do they shift according to the situation in
which people 􀉹nd themselves? If you talk to Professor Little, he’ll tell you
that despite his public persona and his teaching accolades, he’s a true
blue, o􀊃-the-charts introvert, not only behaviorally but also
neurophysiologically (he took the lemon juice test I described in chapter 4
and salivated right on cue). This would seem to place him squarely on the
“person” side of the debate: Little believes that personality traits exist,
that they shape our lives in profound ways, that they’re based on
physiological mechanisms, and that they’re relatively stable across a
lifespan. Those who take this view stand on broad shoulders: Hippocrates,
Milton, Schopenhauer, Jung, and more recently the prophets of fMRI
machines and skin conductance tests.
On the other side of the debate are a group of psychologists known as
the Situationists. Situationism posits that our generalizations about
people, including the words we use to describe one another—shy,
aggressive, conscientious, agreeable—are misleading. There is no core
self; there are only the various selves of Situations X, Y, and Z. The
Situationist view rose to prominence in 1968 when the psychologist
Walter Mischel published Personality and Assessment, challenging the idea
of 􀉹xed personality traits. Mischel argued that situational factors predict
the behavior of people like Brian Little much better than supposed
personality traits.
For the next few decades, Situationism prevailed. The postmodern view
of self that emerged around this time, in􀉻uenced by theorists like Erving
Go􀊃man, author of The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, suggested that
social life is performance and social masks are our true selves. Many
researchers doubted whether personality traits even existed in any
meaningful sense. Personality researchers had trouble finding jobs.
But just as the nature-nurture debate was replaced with interactionism
—the insight that both factors contribute to who we are, and indeed
in􀉻uence each other—so has the person-situation debate been superseded
by a more nuanced understanding. Personality psychologists acknowledge
that we can feel sociable at 6:00 p.m. and solitary at 10:00 p.m., and that
these 􀉻uctuations are real and situation-dependent. But they also
emphasize how much evidence has emerged to support the premise that
notwithstanding these variations, there truly is such a thing as a 􀉹xed
personality.
These days, even Mischel admits that personality traits exist, but he
believes they tend to occur in patterns. For example, some people are
aggressive with peers and subordinates but docile with authority 􀉹gures;
others are just the opposite. People who are “rejection-sensitive” are
warm and loving when they feel secure, hostile and controlling when they
feel rejected.
But this comfortable compromise raises a variation on the problem of
free will that we explored in chapter 5. We know that there are
physiological limits on who we are and how we act. But should we
attempt to manipulate our behavior within the range available to us, or
should we simply be true to ourselves? At what point does controlling our
behavior become futile, or exhausting?
If you’re an introvert in corporate America, should you try to save your
true self for quiet weekends and spend your weekdays striving to “get out
there, mix, speak more often, and connect with your team and others,
deploying all the energy and personality you can muster,” as Jack Welch
advised in a BusinessWeek online column? If you’re an extroverted
university student, should you save your true self for rowdy weekends and
spend your weekdays focusing and studying? Can people 􀉹ne-tune their
own personalities this way?
The only good answer I’ve heard to these questions comes from
Professor Brian Little.
On the morning of October 12, 1979, Little visited the Royal Military
College Saint-Jean on the Richelieu River, forty kilometers south of
Montreal, to address a group of senior military o􀉽cers. As an introvert
might be expected to do, he’d prepared thoroughly for the speech, not
only rehearsing his remarks but also making sure he could cite the latest
research. Even while delivering his talk, he was in what he calls classic
introvert mode, continually scanning the room for audience displeasure
and making adjustments as needed—a statistical reference here, a dollop
of humor there.
The speech was a success (so much so that he would be invited to make
it every year). But the next invitation the college extended horri􀉹ed him:
to join the top brass for lunch. Little had to deliver another lecture that
afternoon, and he knew that making small talk for an hour and a half
would wipe him out. He needed to recharge for his afternoon
performance.
Thinking quickly, he announced that he had a passion for ship design
and asked his hosts if he might instead take the opportunity of his visit to
admire the boats passing by on the Richelieu River. He then spent his
lunch hour strolling up and down the river pathway with an appreciative
expression on his face.
For years Little returned to lecture at the college, and for years, at
lunchtime, he walked the banks of the Richelieu River indulging his
imaginary hobby—until the day the college moved its campus to a
landlocked location. Stripped of his cover story, Professor Little resorted
to the only escape hatch he could 􀉹nd—the men’s room. After each
lecture, he would race to the restroom and hide inside a stall. One time, a
military man spotted Little’s shoes under the door and began a hearty
conversation, so Little took to keeping his feet propped up on the
bathroom walls, where they would be hidden from view. (Taking shelter
i n bathrooms is a surprisingly common phenomenon, as you probably
know if you’re an introvert. “After a talk, I’m in bathroom stall number
nine,” Little once told Peter Gzowski, one of Canada’s most eminent talkshow
hosts. “After a show, I’m in stall number eight,” replied Gzowski, not
missing a beat.)
You might wonder how a strong introvert like Professor Little manages
to speak in public so e􀊃ectively. The answer, he says, is simple, and it has
to do with a new 􀉹eld of psychology that he created almost
singlehandedly, called Free Trait Theory. Little believes that 􀉹xed traits
and free traits coexist. According to Free Trait Theory, we are born and
culturally endowed with certain personality traits—introversion, for
example—but we can and do act out of character in the service of “core
personal projects.”
In other words, introverts are capable of acting like extroverts for the
sake of work they consider important, people they love, or anything they
value highly. Free Trait Theory explains why an introvert might throw his
extroverted wife a surprise party or join the PTA at his daughter’s school.
It explains how it’s possible for an extroverted scientist to behave with
reserve in her laboratory, for an agreeable person to act hard-nosed
during a business negotiation, and for a cantankerous uncle to treat his
niece tenderly when he takes her out for ice cream. As these examples
suggest, Free Trait Theory applies in many di􀊃erent contexts, but it’s
especially relevant for introverts living under the Extrovert Ideal.
According to Little, our lives are dramatically enhanced when we’re
involved in core personal projects that we consider meaningful,
manageable, and not unduly stressful, and that are supported by others.
When someone asks us “How are things?” we may give a throwaway
answer, but our true response is a function of how well our core personal
projects are going.
That’s why Professor Little, the consummate introvert, lectures with
such passion. Like a modern-day Socrates, he loves his students deeply;
opening their minds and attending to their well-being are two of his core
personal projects. When Little held o􀉽ce hours at Harvard, the students
lined up in the hallway as if he were giving out free tickets to a rock
concert. For more than twenty years his students asked him to write
several hundred letters of recommendation a year. “Brian Little is the most
engaging, entertaining, and caring professor I have ever encountered,”
wrote one student about him. “I cannot even begin to explain the myriad
ways in which he has positively a􀊃ected my life.” So, for Brian Little, the
additional e􀊃ort required to stretch his natural boundaries is justi􀉹ed by
seeing his core personal project—igniting all those minds—come to
fruition.
At 􀉹rst blush, Free Trait Theory seems to run counter to a cherished
piece of our cultural heritage. Shakespeare’s oft-quoted advice, “To thine
own self be true,” runs deep in our philosophical DNA. Many of us are
uncomfortable with the idea of taking on a “false” persona for any length
of time. And if we act out of character by convincing ourselves that our
pseudo-self is real, we can eventually burn out without even knowing
why. The genius of Little’s theory is how neatly it resolves this discomfort.
Yes, we are only pretending to be extroverts, and yes, such inauthenticity
can be morally ambiguous (not to mention exhausting), but if it’s in the
service of love or a professional calling, then we’re doing just as
Shakespeare advised.
When people are skilled at adopting free traits, it can be hard to believe
that they’re acting out of character. Professor Little’s students are usually
incredulous when he claims to be an introvert. But Little is far from
unique; many people, especially those in leadership roles, engage in a
certain level of pretend-extroversion. Consider, for example, my friend
Alex, the socially adept head of a 􀉹nancial services company, who agreed
to give a candid interview on the condition of sealed-in-blood anonymity.
Alex told me that pretend-extroversion was something he taught himself
in the seventh grade, when he decided that other kids were taking
advantage of him.
“I was the nicest person you’d ever want to know,” Alex recalls, “but
the world wasn’t that way. The problem was that if you were just a nice
person, you’d get crushed. I refused to live a life where people could do
that stu􀊃 to me. I was like, OK, what’s the policy prescription here? And
there really was only one. I needed to have every person in my pocket. If
I wanted to be a nice person, I needed to run the school.”
But how to get from A to B? “I studied social dynamics, I guarantee
more than anyone you’ve ever met,” Alex told me. He observed the way
people talked, the way they walked—especially male dominance poses.
He adjusted his own persona, which allowed him to go on being a
fundamentally shy, sweet kid, but without being taken advantage of.
“Any hard thing where you can get crushed, I was like, ‘I need to learn
how to do this.’ So by now I’m built for war. Because then people don’t
screw you.”
Alex also took advantage of his natural strengths. “I learned that boys
basically do only one thing: they chase girls. They get them, they lose
them, they talk about them. I was like, ‘That’s completely circuitous. I
really like girls.’ That’s where intimacy comes from. So rather than sitting
around and talking about girls, I got to know them. I used having
relationships with girls, plus being good at sports, to have the guys in my
pocket. Oh, and every once in a while, you have to punch people. I did
that, too.”
Today Alex has a folksy, a􀊃able, whistle-while-you-work demeanor. I’ve
never seen him in a bad mood. But you’ll see his self-taught bellicose side
if you ever try to cross him in a negotiation. And you’ll see his introverted
self if you ever try to make dinner plans with him.
“I could literally go years without having any friends except for my
wife and kids,” he says. “Look at you and me. You’re one of my best
friends, and how many times do we actually talk—when you call me! I
don’t like socializing. My dream is to live o􀊃 the land on a thousand acres
with my family. You never see a team of friends in that dream. So
notwithstanding whatever you might see in my public persona, I am an
introvert. I think that fundamentally I’m the same person I always was.
Massively shy, but I compensate for it.”
But how many of us are really capable of acting out of character to this
degree (putting aside, for the moment, the question of whether we want
to)? Professor Little happens to be a great performer, and so are many
CEOs. What about the rest of us?
Some years ago, a research psychologist named Richard Lippa set out to
answer this question. He called a group of introverts to his lab and asked
them to act like extroverts while pretending to teach a math class. Then
he and his team, video cameras in hand, measured the length of their
strides, the amount of eye contact they made with their “students,” the
percentage of time they spent talking, the pace and volume of their
speech, and the total length of each teaching session. They also rated how
generally extroverted the subjects appeared, based on their recorded
voices and body language.
Then Lippa did the same thing with actual extroverts and compared the
results. He found that although the latter group came across as more
extroverted, some of the pseudo-extroverts were surprisingly convincing.
It seems that most of us know how to fake it to some extent. Whether or
not we’re aware that the length of our strides and the amount of time we
spend talking and smiling mark us as introverts and extroverts, we know
it unconsciously.
Still, there’s a limit to how much we can control our self-presentation.
This is partly because of a phenomenon called behavioral leakage, in
which our true selves seep out via unconscious body language: a subtle
look away at a moment when an extrovert would have made eye contact,
or a skillful turn of the conversation by a lecturer that places the burden
of talking on the audience when an extroverted speaker would have held
the floor a little longer.
How was it that some of Lippa’s pseudo-extroverts came so close to the
scores of true extroverts? It turned out that the introverts who were
especially good at acting like extroverts tended to score high for a trait
that psychologists call “self-monitoring.” Self-monitors are highly skilled
at modifying their behavior to the social demands of a situation. They
look for cues to tell them how to act. When in Rome, they do as the
Romans do, according to the psychologist Mark Snyder, author of Public
Appearances, Private Realities, and creator of the Self-Monitoring Scale.
One of the most e􀊃ective self-monitors I’ve ever met is a man named
Edgar, a well-known and much-beloved 􀉹xture on the New York social
circuit. He and his wife host or attend fund-raisers and other social events
seemingly every weeknight. He’s the kind of enfant terrible whose latest
antics are a favorite topic of conversation. But Edgar is an avowed
introvert. “I’d much rather sit and read and think about things than talk
to people,” he says.
Yet talk to people he does. Edgar was raised in a highly social family
that expected him to self-monitor, and he’s motivated to do so. “I love
politics,” he says. “I love policy, I love making things happen, I want to
change the world in my own way. So I do stu􀊃 that’s arti􀉹cial. I don’t
really like being the guest at someone else’s party, because then I have to
be entertaining. But I’ll host parties because it puts you at the center of
things without actually being a social person.”
When he does 􀉹nd himself at other people’s parties, Edgar goes to great
lengths to play his role. “All through college, and recently even, before I
ever went to a dinner or cocktail party, I would have an index card with
three to 􀉹ve relevant, amusing anecdotes. I’d come up with them during
the day—if something struck me I’d jot it down. Then, at dinner, I’d wait
for the right opening and launch in. Sometimes I’d have to go to the
bathroom and pull out my cards to remember what my little stories were.”
Over time, though, Edgar stopped bringing index cards to dinner
parties. He still considers himself an introvert, but he grew so deeply into
his extroverted role that telling anecdotes started to come naturally to
him. Indeed, the highest self-monitors not only tend to be good at
producing the desired e􀊃ect and emotion in a given social situation—they
also experience less stress while doing so.
In contrast to the Edgars of the world, low self-monitors base their
behavior on their own internal compass. They have a smaller repertoire
of social behaviors and masks at their disposal. They’re less sensitive to
situational cues, like how many anecdotes you’re expected to share at a
dinner party, and less interested in role-playing, even when they know
what the cues are. It’s as if low self-monitors (LSMs) and high selfmonitors
(HSMs) play to di􀊃erent audiences, Snyder has said: one inner,
the other outer.
If you want to know how strong a self-monitor you are, here are a few
questions from Snyder’s Self-Monitoring Scale:
When you’re uncertain how to act in a social situation, do you look to
the behavior of others for cues?
Do you often seek the advice of your friends to choose movies, books,
or music?
In different situations and with different people, do you often act like
very different people?
Do you find it easy to imitate other people?
Can you look someone in the eye and tell a lie with a straight face if
for a right end?
Do you ever deceive people by being friendly when really you dislike
them?
Do you put on a show to impress or entertain people?
Do you sometimes appear to others to be experiencing deeper
emotions than you actually are?
The more times you answered “yes” to these questions, the more of a high
self-monitor you are.
Now ask yourself these questions:
Is your behavior usually an expression of your true inner feelings,
attitudes, and beliefs?
Do you find that you can only argue for ideas that you already
believe?
Would you refuse to change your opinions, or the way you do things,
in order to please someone else or win their favor?
Do you dislike games like charades or improvisational acting?
Do you have trouble changing your behavior to suit different people
and different situations?
The more you tended to answer “yes” to this second set of questions, the
more of a low self-monitor you are.
When Professor Little introduced the concept of self-monitoring to his
personality psychology classes, some students got very worked up about
whether it was ethical to be a high self-monitor. A few “mixed” couples—
HSMs and LSMs in love—even broke up over it, he was told. To high selfmonitors,
low self-monitors can seem rigid and socially awkward. To low
self-monitors, high self-monitors can come across as conformist and
deceptive—“more pragmatic than principled,” in Mark Snyder’s words.
Indeed, HSMs have been found to be better liars than LSMs, which would
seem to support the moralistic stance taken by low self-monitors.
But Little, an ethical and sympathetic man who happens to be an
extremely high self-monitor, sees things di􀊃erently. He views selfmonitoring
as an act of modesty. It’s about accommodating oneself to
situational norms, rather than “grinding down everything to one’s own
needs and concerns.” Not all self-monitoring is based on acting, he says,
or on working the room. A more introverted version may be less
concerned with spotlight-seeking and more with the avoidance of social
faux pas. When Professor Little makes a great speech, it’s partly because
he’s self-monitoring every moment, continually checking his audience for
subtle signs of pleasure or boredom and adjusting his presentation to meet
its needs.
So if you can fake it, if you master the acting skills, the attention to social
nuance, and the willingness to submit to social norms that self-monitoring
requires, should you? The answer is that a Free Trait strategy can be
effective when used judiciously, but disastrous if overdone.
Recently I spoke on a panel at Harvard Law School. The occasion was
the 􀉹fty-􀉹fth anniversary of women being admitted to the law school.
Alumnae from all over the country gathered on campus to celebrate. The
subject of the panel was “In a Di􀊃erent Voice: Strategies for Powerful
Self-Presentation.” There were four speakers: a trial lawyer, a judge, a
public-speaking coach, and me. I’d prepared my remarks carefully; I knew
the role I wanted to play.
The public-speaking coach went 􀉹rst. She talked about how to give a
talk that knocks people’s socks o􀊃. The judge, who happened to be
Korean-American, spoke of how frustrating it is when people assume that
all Asians are quiet and studious when in fact she’s outgoing and
assertive. The litigator, who was petite and blond and feisty as hell,
talked about the time she conducted a cross-examination only to be
admonished by a judge to “Back down, tiger!”
When my turn came, I aimed my remarks at the women in the audience
who didn’t see themselves as tigers, myth-busters, or sock-knocker-o􀊃ers. I
said that the ability to negotiate is not inborn, like blond hair or straight
teeth, and it does not belong exclusively to the table-pounders of the
world. Anyone can be a great negotiator, I told them, and in fact it often
pays to be quiet and gracious, to listen more than talk, and to have an
instinct for harmony rather than con􀉻ict. With this style, you can take
aggressive positions without in􀉻aming your counterpart’s ego. And by
listening, you can learn what’s truly motivating the person you’re
negotiating with and come up with creative solutions that satisfy both
parties.
I also shared some psychological tricks for feeling calm and secure
during intimidating situations, such as paying attention to how your face
and body arrange themselves when you’re feeling genuinely con􀉹dent,
and adopting those same positions when it comes time to fake it. Studies
show that taking simple physical steps—like smiling—makes us feel
stronger and happier, while frowning makes us feel worse.
Naturally, when the panel was over and the audience member came
around to chat with the panelists, it was the introverts and pseudoextroverts
who sought me out. Two of those women stand out in my mind.
The 􀉹rst was Alison, a trial lawyer. Alison was slim and meticulously
groomed, but her face was pale, pinched, and unhappy-looking. She’d
been a litigator at the same corporate law 􀉹rm for over a decade. Now
she was applying for general counsel positions at various companies,
which seemed a logical next step, except that her heart clearly wasn’t in
it. And sure enough, she hadn’t gotten a single job o􀊃er. On the strength
of her credentials, she was advancing to the 􀉹nal round of interviews,
only to be weeded out at the last minute. And she knew why, because the
head-hunter who’d coordinated her interviews gave the same feedback
each time: she lacked the right personality for the job. Alison, a selfdescribed
introvert, looked pained as she related this damning judgment.
The second alumna, Jillian, held a senior position at an environmental
advocacy organization that she loved. Jillian came across as kind,
cheerful, and down-to-earth. She was fortunate to spend much of her time
researching and writing policy papers on topics she cared about.
Sometimes, though, she had to chair meetings and make presentations.
Although she felt deep satisfaction after these meetings, she didn’t enjoy
the spotlight, and wanted my advice on staying cool when she felt scared.
So what was the di􀊃erence between Alison and Jillian? Both were
pseudo-extroverts, and you might say that Alison was trying and failing
where Jillian was succeeding. But Alison’s problem was actually that she
was acting out of character in the service of a project she didn’t care
about. She didn’t love the law. She’d chosen to become a Wall Street
litigator because it seemed to her that this was what powerful and
successful lawyers did, so her pseudo-extroversion was not supported by
deeper values. She was not telling herself, I’m doing this to advance work I
care about deeply, and when the work is done I’ll settle back into my true self.
Instead, her interior monologue was The route to success is to be the sort of
person I am not. This is not self-monitoring; it is self-negation. Where
Jillian acts out of character for the sake of worthy tasks that temporarily
require a di􀊃erent orientation, Alison believes that there is something
fundamentally wrong with who she is.
It’s not always so easy, it turns out, to identify your core personal
projects. And it can be especially tough for introverts, who have spent so
much of their lives conforming to extroverted norms that by the time they
choose a career, or a calling, it feels perfectly normal to ignore their own
preferences. They may be uncomfortable in law school or nursing school
or in the marketing department, but no more so than they were back in
middle school or summer camp.
I, too, was once in this position. I enjoyed practicing corporate law,
and for a while I convinced myself that I was an attorney at heart. I badly
wanted to believe it, since I had already invested years in law school and
on-the-job training, and much about Wall Street law was alluring. My
colleagues were intellectual, kind, and considerate (mostly). I made a
good living. I had an o􀉽ce on the forty-second 􀉻oor of a skyscraper with
views of the Statue of Liberty. I enjoyed the idea that I could 􀉻ourish in
such a high-powered environment. And I was pretty good at asking the
“but” and “what if” questions that are central to the thought processes of
most lawyers.
It took me almost a decade to understand that the law was never my
personal project, not even close. Today I can tell you unhesitatingly what
is: my husband and sons; writing; promoting the values of this book. Once
I realized this, I had to make a change. I look back on my years as a Wall
Street lawyer as time spent in a foreign country. It was absorbing, it was
exciting, and I got to meet a lot of interesting people whom I never would
have known otherwise. But I was always an expatriate.
Having spent so much time navigating my own career transition and
counseling others through theirs, I have found that there are three key
steps to identifying your own core personal projects.
First, think back to what you loved to do when you were a child. How
did you answer the question of what you wanted to be when you grew
up? The speci􀉹c answer you gave may have been o􀊃 the mark, but the
underlying impulse was not. If you wanted to be a 􀉹reman, what did a
􀉹reman mean to you? A good man who rescued people in distress? A
daredevil? Or the simple pleasure of operating a truck? If you wanted to
be a dancer, was it because you got to wear a costume, or because you
craved applause, or was it the pure joy of twirling around at lightning
speed? You may have known more about who you were then than you do
now.
Second, pay attention to the work you gravitate to. At my law 􀉹rm I
never once volunteered to take on an extra corporate legal assignment,
but I did spend a lot of time doing pro bono work for a nonpro􀉹t
women’s leadership organization. I also sat on several law 􀉹rm
committees dedicated to mentoring, training, and personal development
for young lawyers in the 􀉹rm. Now, as you can probably tell from this
book, I am not the committee type. But the goals of those committees lit
me up, so that’s what I did.
Finally, pay attention to what you envy. Jealousy is an ugly emotion,
but it tells the truth. You mostly envy those who have what you desire. I
met my own envy after some of my former law school classmates got
together and compared notes on alumni career tracks. They spoke with
admiration and, yes, jealousy, of a classmate who argued regularly before
the Supreme Court. At 􀉹rst I felt critical. More power to that classmate! I
thought, congratulating myself on my magnanimity. Then I realized that
my largesse came cheap, because I didn’t aspire to argue a case before the
Supreme Court, or to any of the other accolades of lawyering. When I
asked myself whom I did envy, the answer came back instantly. My
college classmates who’d grown up to be writers or psychologists. Today
I’m pursuing my own version of both those roles.
But even if you’re stretching yourself in the service of a core personal
project, you don’t want to act out of character too much, or for too long.
Remember those trips Professor Little made to the restroom in between
speeches? Those hideout sessions tell us that, paradoxically, the best way
to act out of character is to stay as true to yourself as you possibly can—
starting by creating as many “restorative niches” as possible in your daily
life.
“Restorative niche” is Professor Little’s term for the place you go when
you want to return to your true self. It can be a physical place, like the
path beside the Richelieu River, or a temporal one, like the quiet breaks
you plan between sales calls. It can mean canceling your social plans on
the weekend before a big meeting at work, practicing yoga or meditation,
or choosing e-mail over an in-person meeting. (Even Victorian ladies,
whose job e􀊃ectively was to be available to friends and family, were
expected to withdraw for a rest each afternoon.)
You choose a restorative niche when you close the door to your private
o􀉽ce (if you’re lucky enough to have one) in between meetings. You can
even create a restorative niche during a meeting, by carefully selecting
where you sit, and when and how you participate. In his memoir In an
Uncertain World, Robert Rubin, the treasury secretary under President
Clinton, describes how he “always liked to be away from the center,
whether in the Oval O􀉽ce or the chief of sta􀊃’s o􀉽ce, where my regular
seat became the foot of the table. That little bit of physical distance felt
more comfortable to me, and let me read the room and comment from a
perspective ever so slightly removed. I didn’t worry about being
overlooked. No matter how far away you were sitting or standing, you
could always just say, ‘Mr. President, I think this, that, or the other.’ ”
We would all be better o􀊃 if, before accepting a new job, we evaluated
the presence or absence of restorative niches as carefully as we consider
the family leave policy or health insurance plans. Introverts should ask
themselves: Will this job allow me to spend time on in-character activities
like, for example, reading, strategizing, writing, and researching? Will I
have a private workspace or be subject to the constant demands of an
open o􀉽ce plan? If the job doesn’t give me enough restorative niches,
will I have enough free time on evenings and weekends to grant them to
myself?
Extroverts will want to look for restorative niches, too. Does the job
involve talking, traveling, and meeting new people? Is the o􀉽ce space
stimulating enough? If the job isn’t a perfect 􀉹t, are the hours 􀉻exible
enough that I can blow o􀊃 steam after work? Think through the job
description carefully. One highly extroverted woman I interviewed was
excited about a position as the “community organizer” for a parenting
website, until she realized that she’d be sitting by herself behind a
computer every day from nine to five.
Sometimes people 􀉹nd restorative niches in professions where you’d
least expect them. One of my former colleagues is a trial lawyer who
spends most of her time in splendid solitude, researching and writing
legal briefs. Because most of her cases settle, she goes to court rarely
enough that she doesn’t mind exercising her pseudo-extroversion skills
when she has to. An introverted administrative assistant I interviewed
parlayed her o􀉽ce experience into a work-from-home Internet business
that serves as a clearinghouse and coaching service for “virtual
assistants.” And in the next chapter we’ll meet a superstar salesman who
broke his company’s sales records year after year by insisting on staying
true to his introverted self. All three of these people have taken decidedly
extroverted 􀉹elds and reinvented them in their own image, so that they’re
acting in character most of the time, e􀊃ectively turning their workdays
into one giant restorative niche.
Finding restorative niches isn’t always easy. You might want to read
quietly by the 􀉹re on Saturday nights, but if your spouse wishes you’d
spend those evenings out with her large circle of friends, then what? You
might want to retreat to the oasis of your private o􀉽ce in between sales
calls, but what if your company just switched over to an open o􀉽ce plan?
If you plan to exercise free traits, you’ll need the help of friends, family,
and colleagues. Which is why Professor Little calls, with great passion, for
each of us to enter into “a Free Trait Agreement.”
This is the 􀉹nal piece of Free Trait Theory. A Free Trait Agreement
acknowledges that we’ll each act out of character some of the time—in
exchange for being ourselves the rest of the time. It’s a Free Trait
Agreement when a wife who wants to go out every Saturday night and a
husband who wants to relax by the 􀉹re work out a schedule: half the time
we’ll go out, and half the time we’ll stay home. It’s a Free Trait Agreement
when you attend your extroverted best friend’s wedding shower,
engagement celebration, and bachelorette party, but she understands
when you skip out on the three days’ worth of group activities leading up
to the wedding itself.
It’s often possible to negotiate Free Trait Agreements with friends and
lovers, whom you want to please and who love your true, in-character
self. Your work life is a little trickier, since most businesses still don’t
think in these terms. For now, you may have to proceed indirectly. Career
counselor Shoya Zichy told me the story of one of her clients, an
introverted 􀉹nancial analyst who worked in an environment where she
was either presenting to clients or talking to colleagues who continually
cycled in and out of her o􀉽ce. She was so burned out that she planned to
quit her job—until Zichy suggested that she negotiate for downtime.
Now, this woman worked for a Wall Street bank, not a culture
conducive to a frank discussion about the needs of the highly introverted.
So she carefully considered how to frame her request. She told her boss
that the very nature of her work—strategic analysis—required quiet time
in which to concentrate. Once she made her case empirically, it was easier
to ask for what she needed psychologically: two days a week of working
from home. Her boss said yes.
But the person with whom you can best strike a Free Trait Agreement—
after overcoming his or her resistance—is yourself.
Let’s say you’re single. You dislike the bar scene, but you crave
intimacy, and you want to be in a long-term relationship in which you
can share cozy evenings and long conversations with your partner and a
small circle of friends. In order to achieve this goal, you make an
agreement with yourself that you will push yourself to go to social events,
because only in this way can you hope to meet a mate and reduce the
number of gatherings you attend over the long term. But while you pursue
this goal, you will attend only as many events as you can comfortably
stand. You decide in advance what that amount is—once a week, once a
month, once a quarter. And once you’ve met your quota, you’ve earned
the right to stay home without feeling guilty.
Or perhaps you’ve always dreamed of building your own small
company, working from home so you can spend more time with your
spouse and children. You know you’ll need to do a certain amount of
networking, so you make the following Free Trait Agreement with
yourself: you will go to one schmooze-fest per week. At each event you
will have at least one genuine conversation (since this comes easier to you
than “working the room”) and follow up with that person the next day.
After that, you get to go home and not feel bad when you turn down other
networking opportunities that come your way.
Professor Little knows all too well what happens when you lack a Free
Trait Agreement with yourself. Apart from occasional excursions to the
Richelieu River or the restroom, he once followed a schedule that
combined the most energy-zapping elements of both introversion and
extroversion. On the extroverted side, his days consisted of nonstop
lectures, meetings with students, monitoring a student discussion group,
and writing all those letters of recommendation. On the introverted side,
he took those responsibilities very, very seriously.
“One way of looking at this,” he says now, “is to say that I was heavily
engaged in extrovert-like behaviors, but, of course, had I been a real
extrovert I would have done quicker, less nuanced letters of
recommendation, would not have invested the time in preparation of
lectures, and the social events would not have drained me.” He also
su􀊃ered from a certain amount of what he calls “reputational confusion,”
in which he became known for being over-the-top e􀊃ervescent, and the
reputation fed on itself. This was the persona that others knew, so it was
the persona he felt obliged to serve up.
Naturally, Professor Little started to burn out, not only mentally but
also physically. Never mind. He loved his students, he loved his 􀉹eld, he
loved it all. Until the day that he ended up in the doctor’s o􀉽ce with a
case of double pneumonia that he’d been too busy to notice. His wife had
dragged him there against his will, and a good thing too. According to the
doctors, if she had waited much longer, he would have died.
Double pneumonia and an overscheduled life can happen to anyone, of
course, but for Little, it was the result of acting out of character for too
long and without enough restorative niches. When your conscientiousness
impels you to take on more than you can handle, you begin to lose
interest, even in tasks that normally engage you. You also risk your
physical health. “Emotional labor,” which is the e􀊃ort we make to control
and change our own emotions, is associated with stress, burnout, and
even physical symptoms like an increase in cardiovascular disease.
Professor Little believes that prolonged acting out of character may also
increase autonomic nervous system activity, which can, in turn,
compromise immune functioning.
One noteworthy study suggests that people who suppress negative
emotions tend to leak those emotions later in unexpected ways. The
psychologist Judith Grob asked people to hide their emotions as she
showed them disgusting images. She even had them hold pens in their
mouths to prevent them from frowning. She found that this group
reported feeling less disgusted by the pictures than did those who’d been
allowed to react naturally. Later, however, the people who hid their
emotions su􀊃ered side e􀊃ects. Their memory was impaired, and the
negative emotions they’d suppressed seemed to color their outlook. When
Grob had them 􀉹ll in the missing letter to the word “gr_ss,” for example,
they were more likely than others to o􀊃er “gross” rather than “grass.”
“People who tend to [suppress their negative emotions] regularly,”
concludes Grob, “might start to see the world in a more negative light.”
That’s why these days Professor Little is in restorative mode, retired
from the university and reveling in his wife’s company in their house in
the Canadian countryside. Little says that his wife, Sue Phillips, the
director of the School of Public Policy and Administration at Carleton
University, is so much like him that they don’t need a Free Trait
Agreement to govern their relationship. But his Free Trait Agreement with
himself provides that he do his remaining “scholarly and professional
deeds with good grace,” but not “hang around longer than necessary.”
Then he goes home and snuggles by the fire with Sue